All of the network devices you've just learned about, exist so that computers
can communicate with each other, whether they're in the same room or thousands
of miles apart. We've been calling these devices nodes, and we'll keep doing
that, but it's also important to understand the concepts of servers, and
clients. The simplest way to think of a server, is as something that provides
data to something requesting that data. The thing receiving the data, is
referred to as a client. While we often talk about nodes being servers or
clients, the reason our definition uses a word as vague as something, is because
it's not just nodes that can be servers or clients. Individual computer programs
running on the same node can be servers, an clients to each other too. It's also
important to call out, that most devices aren't purely a server, or a client,
almost all nodes are both at some point in time, quite the multitasking over
achievers. That all being said, in most network topographies, each node is
primarily either a server, or a client. Sometimes we refer to an email server as
an email server, even though it itself a client of a DNS server, why? Because
its primary reason for existing, is to serve data to clients. Likewise, if a
desktop machine occasionally acts as a server in the sense that it provides data
to another computer, its primary reason for existing, is to fetch data from
servers so that the user at the computer, can do their work. To sum up, a server
is anything that can provide data to a client, but we also use the words to
refer to the primary purpose of various nodes on our network, got it? Cool, now
it's time for a short, underrated quiz to test you on the basics of these
networking devices.