Businesses have lots of reasons to
want to keep their network secure, and they do this by using some of
the technologies we've already discussed firewalls, Nat, use of non routable
address space, things like that. Organizations often have proprietary
information that needs to remain secure. Network services that are only intended
for employees to access and other things. One of the easiest ways to keep
network secure is to use various securing technologies, so only devices
physically connected to their local area network can access these resources. But employees aren't always in the office. They might be working from home or
on a business trip, and they might still need access to these
resources in order to get their work done. That's where VPNs come in. Virtual private networks or VPNs are a
technology that allows for the extension of a private or local network to host that
might not work on that same local network. VPNs come in many flavors and
accomplish lots of different things. But the most common example
of how VPNs are used is for employees to access their business's
network when they're not in the office. VPNs are a tunneling protocol, which means they provision access
to something not locally available. When establishing a VPN connection, you might also say that a VPN
tunnel has been established. Let's go back to the example of
an employee who needs to access company resources while not in the office. The employee could use a VPN client
to establish a VPN tunnel to their company network. This would provision their computer with
what's known as a virtual interface with an IP that matches the address space of
the network they've established a VPN connection to. By sending data out of
this virtual interface, the computer could access internal
resources just like if it was physically connected to
the private network. Most VPNs work by using the payload
section of the transport layer to carry an encrypted payload that actually
contains an entire second set of packets. The network, the transport and the application layers of a packet
intended to traverse the remote network. Basically, this payload is carried to the
VPNs end point where all the other layers are stripped away and discarded. Then the payload is unencrypted, leaving the VPN server with the top
three layers of a new packet. This gets encapsulated with the proper
data link layer information and sent out across the network. This process is completed in the inverse,
in the opposite direction. VPNs usually requires strict
authentication procedures in order to ensure that they can only be
connected to by computers and users authorized to do so. In fact, VPNs were one of the first
technologies where two-factor authentication became common. Two-factor authentication is a technique
where more than just a username and password are required to authenticate. Usually a short lived numerical token
is generated by the user through a specialized piece of hardware or
software. VPNs can also be used to establish
site to site connectivity. Conceptually, there isn't much difference
between how this works compared to our remote employees situation. It's just that the router, or sometimes
a specialized VPN device on one network establishes the VPN tunnel to the router
or VPN device on another network. This way two physically separated offices
might be able to act as one network and access network resources
across the tunnel. It's important to call out that,
just like Nat, VPNs are a general technology concept,
not a strictly defined protocol. There are lots of unique
implementations of VPNs, and the details of how they
all work can differ a ton. The most important takeaway is that
VPNs are a technology that use encrypted tunnels to allow for a remote computer or
network to act as if it's connected to a network that it's not actually
physically connected to.
